readme.md, before:

# Pris

Pris is a domain-specific language for designing slides and other graphics.

[![Build Status][ci-img]][ci]
[![Gitter][gitter-img]][gitter]


## Example

The obligatory “hello world”:

    {
      put t("Hello world") at (0.1w, 0.5h)
    }

And to show a little more of the language, here is a slightly more elaborate
program that also draws lines:

    top_left = (0w, 0h)
    top_right = (1w, 0h)
    bottom_left = (0w, 1h)
    bottom_right = (1w, 1h)

    {
      at top_left put line(bottom_right)
      at bottom_left put line(top_right - bottom_left)

      font_family = "Cantarell"
      font_size = 0.3h
      color = #882244
      at (0.1w, 0.1w + font_size) put t("A language for designing slides.")
    }

    {
      color = #000000
      at (0w, 0.5h) put line((1w, 0h))
    }

It creates two slides, the first one with a cross in it, the second one with a
horizontal line. The first slide contains text in dark purple.

## Comparison to other technologies

 * Pris is similar to LaTeX with Beamer in the sense that you write your slides
   in a text-based, human readable format, from which a pdf is produced. Pris
   differs from LaTeX with Beamer in not doing any lay-out. All elements must be
   placed manually.
 * Pris is similar to reveal.js in that its control over visuals superficially
   resembles css. It differs from reveal.js in requiring a separate compilation
   step that renders a pdf. It differs from html in being imperative rather than
   declarative.
 * Pris is similar to TikZ in LaTeX, in the sense that it is a domain-specific
   language for creating graphics. It is similar in providing complete control
   over where elements are placed. Pris differs from TikZ in not being embedded
   in LaTeX. It has a more modern syntax, and it has first class support for
   computation. For instance, arithmetic with coordinates is supported out of
   the box, and Pris has proper functions, rather than TeX macros.
 * Pris is vaguely similar to Powerpoint and graphical editors like Illustrator
   or Inkscape in providing complete control over where elements are placed. It
   differs in being a text-based format intended to be edited with a text
   editor, rather than with a graphical editor.
 * Pris is similar to an html canvas element, or to drawing with Skia or Cairo,
   in providing complete control over how graphics are drawn. It differs from
   direct canvas drawing in being more high-level (graphic elements can be
   manipulated as first-class values), and in being a domain-specific language
   rather than being controlled by a general-purpose scripting language.

## Documentation

 * [A language for designing slides][blogpost], a blog post that details the
   motivation for building Pris.
 * [Examples](examples), small examples that demonstrate one feature at a time.
 * Ask questions in [the Gitter chatroom][gitter], or [send me an email][contact].
 * The [online documentation][docs] (a work in progress).

## Building

Pris is written in [Rust][rust] and builds with Cargo, the build tool bundled
with Rust.

    cargo build --release
    target/release/pris examples/lines.pris
    evince examples/lines.pdf

Pris uses [Cairo][cairo] for drawing and [Harfbuzz][harfbuzz] for text shaping,
and links against `libcairo.so` and `libharfbuzz.so`. It uses [Rsvg][rsvg] to
render svg images, for which it links against `librsvg-2.so`.

## License

Pris is free software. It is licensed under the
[GNU General Public License][gplv3], version 3.

[ci-img]:     https://travis-ci.org/ruuda/pris.svg?branch=master
[ci]:         https://travis-ci.org/ruuda/pris
[gitter-img]: https://badges.gitter.im/ruuda/pris.svg
[gitter]:     https://gitter.im/ruuda/pris
[blogpost]:   https://ruudvanasseldonk.com/2017/04/27/a-language-for-designing-slides
[contact]:    https://ruudvanasseldonk.com/contact
[docs]:       https://ruuda.github.io/pris/getting-started.html
[rust]:       https://rust-lang.org
[cairo]:      https://cairographics.org
[harfbuzz]:   https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/HarfBuzz/
[rsvg]:       https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/LibRsvg
[gplv3]:      https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html

Commit message:

Point out native dependencies in build instructions
I might add a Nix expression to build as well later. For now this helps
people on Ubuntu.

readme.md, after:

# Pris

Pris is a domain-specific language for designing slides and other graphics.

[![Build Status][ci-img]][ci]
[![Gitter][gitter-img]][gitter]


## Example

The obligatory “hello world”:

    {
      put t("Hello world") at (0.1w, 0.5h)
    }

And to show a little more of the language, here is a slightly more elaborate
program that also draws lines:

    top_left = (0w, 0h)
    top_right = (1w, 0h)
    bottom_left = (0w, 1h)
    bottom_right = (1w, 1h)

    {
      at top_left put line(bottom_right)
      at bottom_left put line(top_right - bottom_left)

      font_family = "Cantarell"
      font_size = 0.3h
      color = #882244
      at (0.1w, 0.1w + font_size) put t("A language for designing slides.")
    }

    {
      color = #000000
      at (0w, 0.5h) put line((1w, 0h))
    }

It creates two slides, the first one with a cross in it, the second one with a
horizontal line. The first slide contains text in dark purple.

## Comparison to other technologies

 * Pris is similar to LaTeX with Beamer in the sense that you write your slides
   in a text-based, human readable format, from which a pdf is produced. Pris
   differs from LaTeX with Beamer in not doing any lay-out. All elements must be
   placed manually.
 * Pris is similar to reveal.js in that its control over visuals superficially
   resembles css. It differs from reveal.js in requiring a separate compilation
   step that renders a pdf. It differs from html in being imperative rather than
   declarative.
 * Pris is similar to TikZ in LaTeX, in the sense that it is a domain-specific
   language for creating graphics. It is similar in providing complete control
   over where elements are placed. Pris differs from TikZ in not being embedded
   in LaTeX. It has a more modern syntax, and it has first class support for
   computation. For instance, arithmetic with coordinates is supported out of
   the box, and Pris has proper functions, rather than TeX macros.
 * Pris is vaguely similar to Powerpoint and graphical editors like Illustrator
   or Inkscape in providing complete control over where elements are placed. It
   differs in being a text-based format intended to be edited with a text
   editor, rather than with a graphical editor.
 * Pris is similar to an html canvas element, or to drawing with Skia or Cairo,
   in providing complete control over how graphics are drawn. It differs from
   direct canvas drawing in being more high-level (graphic elements can be
   manipulated as first-class values), and in being a domain-specific language
   rather than being controlled by a general-purpose scripting language.

## Documentation

 * [A language for designing slides][blogpost], a blog post that details the
   motivation for building Pris.
 * [Examples](examples), small examples that demonstrate one feature at a time.
 * Ask questions in [the Gitter chatroom][gitter], or [send me an email][contact].
 * The [online documentation][docs] (a work in progress).

## Building

Pris uses [Cairo][cairo] for drawing and [Harfbuzz][harfbuzz] for text shaping,
and links against `libcairo.so` and `libharfbuzz.so`. It uses [Rsvg][rsvg] to
render svg images, for which it links against `librsvg-2.so`. Ensure that these
are installed:

    # On Ubuntu
    apt install fonts-cantarell libcairo2-dev libharfbuzz-dev librsvg2-dev

    # On Arch
    pacman -S --needed cantarell-fonts cairo harfbuzz librsvg

Pris is written in [Rust][rust] and builds with Cargo, the build tool bundled
with Rust.

    cargo build --release
    target/release/pris examples/lines.pris
    evince examples/lines.pdf

## License

Pris is free software. It is licensed under the
[GNU General Public License][gplv3], version 3.

[ci-img]:     https://travis-ci.org/ruuda/pris.svg?branch=master
[ci]:         https://travis-ci.org/ruuda/pris
[gitter-img]: https://badges.gitter.im/ruuda/pris.svg
[gitter]:     https://gitter.im/ruuda/pris
[blogpost]:   https://ruudvanasseldonk.com/2017/04/27/a-language-for-designing-slides
[contact]:    https://ruudvanasseldonk.com/contact
[docs]:       https://ruuda.github.io/pris/getting-started.html
[rust]:       https://rust-lang.org
[cairo]:      https://cairographics.org
[harfbuzz]:   https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/HarfBuzz/
[rsvg]:       https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/LibRsvg
[gplv3]:      https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html
